# Colorlib

Ever wanted to create a neat little gradient in KFX? Been frustrated by colorspaces, since RGB gradients rarely really turn out the way you want? Look no further!

Colorlib gives you a multitude of useful[^1] functions for manipulating colors in ASS (and, hey, why not outside it too).

In this, "ASS color string" refers to a value you could pass to, for instance, a `\c` tag, i.e.: `&H012345&`.

## Interpolation

Linear interpolation between two colors in a given colorspace. Arguments for all are in the same format:

`interp_xxx(t, color_1, color_2)`

- `t`: "Distance" to go, from 0 to 1, inclusive. A value of 0 corresponds to `color_1`, a value of 1 to `color_2`. A value of 0.5 is halfway.
- `color_1`: "Starting" color
- `color_2`: "Ending" color

Returns an ASS color string.

Currently, these four colorspaces are supported:

- `interp_lch` - LCh (CIE L\*C\*h)
- `interp_lab` - CIELAB (L\*a\*b\*)
- `interp_rgb` - simple RGB
- `interp_xyz` - XYZ (CIE 1931 XYZ)

In addition, `interp_alpha` is a function with an equivalent signature for ASS alpha values.

## Color formatting

Format "raw" values into ASS color strings.

`fmt_rgb(r, g, b)`
- All values between 0 and 255.

`fmt_xyz(x, y, z)`
- All values between 0 and 1.

`fmt_lab(l, a, b)`
- `l` between 0 and 100.
- `a` and `b` between -128 and 127.

`fmt_lch(l, c, h)`
- `l` between 0 and 100.
- `c` and `h` between 0 and 360.

`fmt_alpha(alpha)`
- Hopefully self-explanatory, mostly to round out the set. Takes values between 0 and 255.

## Color adjustment

Adjust a given color. Currently only supports lighten/darken operations.

`lighten(color, amount)`
- Lighten the given color (ASS color string) by the specified amount.
- `amount` ranges from -1 to 1.
    - 0 leaves the color unchanged
    - 1 makes it as light (close to white) as possible
    - -1 makes it as dark (close to black) as possible

`darken(color, amount)`
- Like `lighten`, but inverse. For more easily readable code.

`lighten_complex(x, y, z, amount, colorspace)`
- Like `lighten`, but instead takes raw color values instead of a color string.
- `colorspace` can be one of `rgb`, `xyz`, `lch`, or `lab` (default).

[^1]: usefulness of aforementioned functions is not guaranteed